---
layout: post
permalink: responsive-deep-work
title: Responsive deep work
summary: >
  This post breaks down how you can create windows of deep focus time while 
  keeping up with all the key notifications you can't miss.
---

Remote work skills are more critical than ever and I'm feeling pretty lucky
lately to have been working remotely the past few years. I used to summarize
remote work as something that's "great for some, but not for everyone". I felt
it would always collapse to one of two states:

<!-- Content Breaker -->

1. Intense, multi-day periods of long focus sessions
2. Whole days of anxiously toggling notifications, social media, and email

Neither of these are ideal. If you're always jumping on every notification that
comes up, you'll finish the day feeling stressed and like you completed
nothing. If you're always in deep focus, you'll be inacessible to your team and
have a growing, daunting mound of notifications and tasks that you'll be
consistently ignoring. We want to be effective **and** responsive.

Steve Streeting's ["the interruptible programmer"] post touched on this idea. I
wanted to share my approach too. I've found that a proper combination of
planning, Pomodoros, and checklists has been great for creating deep focus
space while ensuring no key communication is missed.

## Step 1: Always know your task

Even the best practices for creating focus are useless if you're focusing on
the wrong thing. There's a lot of methods which help with this, but at the core
of them all is that **you should always know what your task is**. I personally
use Bullet Journaling and timeboxing to do this. 

[Timeboxing] is the act of carefully planning your time and the tasks you'll do
in that time. I plan out the majority of my week on Sunday evening. It's a
flexible draft of a schedule, and depending on exactly how busy I am it might
only be filled up 50% of the way. These are rough plans. Things like: when I'm
going to do my workouts, which nights I'm cooking dinner, my work hours, etc.

Each night I plan out the next calendar day carefully from 7am -- 11pm. This is
now a commitment to myself; I try not to change it if I can. There will be some
adjustments along the way, and I update the calendar to match where my time
went for reflection later.

Timeboxing quantifies where my time is going, to make sure the hours I'm living
are lined up with my priorities. Then, [Bullet Journaling] manages the details.
At night, I start my next daily log and migrate up to five tasks into it. This
gives me my goal for the next day: doing whatever those five tasks are, in the
time boxes carved out in the calendar. 

Some of them are personal tasks, some are work tasks, and some are workouts. As
the day progresses I'll focus on whatever ones are related to the timebox I'm
in at that moment.

## Step 2: Create focus space to do those tasks

With an organized plan, you need to execute. This can be easier said than done.
You start your day with a great plan but an urgent email comes in, a slack
notification pops up, you get a call from a friend, you help someone on your
team with an impromptu meeting, and next thing you know it's now 4pm and not
one single thing is checked off your list.

You have to do practice the next rule: **spend most of your time ignoring
everything except your current task**. Pomodoros are a great tool to do that.

If you're not familiar with [Pomodoros], the idea is simple: you spend 25
minutes of focus time working on a single task at a time, followed by a five
minute break. After every four Pomdoros you take a longer, fifteen minute
break. 

You can use your phone timer to do this, but apps can be handy for ease of use
and tracking how many sessions you've done in a day. I use [Fohkuhs], but it's
kind of unmaintained and if I was recommending a new one I might use [Be
Focused].

When doing a Pomodoro, your computer should be on [Do Not Disturb]. Your phone
should be on silent. You should not check Facebook, respond to or read
notifications, or even use the washroom. If you break any of these rules,
restart the Pomodoro from scratch. Get into the habit creating focus space for
yourself for twenty-five minutes and it becomes second nature.

This is where one of the perks of being remote comes in: you can easily create
a space in which it's really hard to interrupt you. Your home situation might
require some tweaking to make this work, depending on what it is. Make sure
your roommates, partner, etc. understand this.

If absolutely necessary, try to quickly address an interruption by saying
you'll get back to them and note a task to do so into your Bullet Journal. If
it's urgent, you can get to it within 25 minutes by making it the task for the
next Pomodoro.

### Step 3: Use checklists to manage distractions

Pomodoro was originally designed as a study method, so the five minute breaks
were genuine breaks where you take a step away to relax. I've often heard
people tell me that they struggle with Pomodoros once they start to get into
the zone. They don't _want_ to stop for five minutes.

What I've found to be the problem is not that the five minutes are a change in
focus, it's that it is a _break in flow_. It provides no guidance about what we
do in that break. Instead, with checklists for your breaks, you make your
breaks _part_ of your flow. 

Unless you're an [academic professor] with tons of time for deep work, or a
student who can study uninterrupted at length, there are probably things which
come up during the work day that you need to respond to. This is especially
true for remote startup teams -- while you've been heads down there's now
email, instant message, code reviews, and other things to attend to.

We address these in the break. Breaks are for notifications, slack, email,
quick replies, follow ups, and so on. Five minutes isn't a lot of time and the
modern world is filled with 101 different services that need your attention. To
deal with that, we have rule three: **have a checklist prioritizing the key
flow during your break**. Make notifications a workflow, not a distraction.
This checklist will be very specific to each person, but here is what mine
looks like:

![Pomodoro checklist](/image/responsive-deep-work/pomodoro.png)

For the first few Pomodoros, it's only a five minute break. Not a ton of time,
but enough to sort through most notifications. When doing this, I follow the
two-minute rule: anything that will take more than two minutes to deal with
ends up as an additional item on the Bullet Journal. I might even decide that I
need to spend the next Pomodoro focusing on it -- that's fine to do.

The checklist is just a document in notion. I keep it open on my main space at
all times. Alongside that I also keep a browser window with email and calendar
open in pinned tabs. Slack too. I consider it my "notification space". When I'm
in a Pomodoro, even if it's just one window I need, I [create a new space] and
switch over to it so that no distractions are visible.

Checklists are my favorite secret weapon. They're great for offloading
cognitive overhead. Use them for everything, even things that seem silly to use
a checklist for. I have a morning checklist that I run through as my first
Pomodoro of the day as well as an evening checklist I run through before bed.
[Nuclino has a post about why they're so great].

Sometimes  — or typically — you won't get all the way through the checklist.
That's totally fine. I usually get to at least working on some emails. The
important part is to go back to focus time when the timer ends. I've noticed
that notifications ebb and flow. Sometimes there are more and I fall behind on
non-urgent things, sometimes there are less and I catch up on things naturally.

When the break timer is up, start a new Pomodoro and switch back to focus time.
If a new, additional item on the Bullet Journal is really important, it might
be what I work on as my next Pomodoro. Typically I go back to what I was just
doing though.

### Conclusion

One thing I really like about this system is that it's very
anti-producitivity-porn. The "tools" here consist of easily replaceable
applications and a paper notebook. I've been doing tasks this way for a few
years now and it no longer feels like I'm chasing "the next big productivity
system". 

In a day with a lot of meetings, I might maybe only get a few Pomodoros in. In
a day with decent focus time I can get around 10. A really productive day might
be up to 15. That five or more hours of deep work while keeping on top of
messages with less than a 30 minute turnaround.

I can absolutely imagine that this is not a system for everyone. It involves a
lot of aggressive structure that won't appeal to some, but productivity is a
very personal thing and I like to think of rules as [good decisions made in
batches]. I'd love to hear what works for you [on Twitter]! 

[Fohkuhs]: http://www.fohkuhs.com/
[Be Focused]: https://apps.apple.com/ca/app/be-focused-focus-timer/id973134470?mt=12
[Do Not Disturb]: https://support.apple.com/en-ca/guide/mac-help/mchl999b7c1a/mac
[academic professor]: https://www.calnewport.com/books/deep-work/
[create a new space]: https://support.apple.com/en-ca/guide/mac-help/mh14112/mac
[Nuclino has a post about why they're so great]: https://blog.nuclino.com/the-simple-genius-of-checklists-from-b-17-to-the-apollo-missions
[timeboxing]: https://clockify.me/timeboxing
[Bullet Journaling]: https://bulletjournal.com/
[Pomodoros]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pomodoro_Technique
[good decisions made in batches]: https://www.raptitude.com/2017/07/wise-people-have-rules-for-themselves/
[on Twitter]: https://twitter.com/chrisfosterelli
["the interruptible programmer"]: https://www.stevestreeting.com/2010/09/04/work-2-0/
